# 317fp
Welcome to Self-Care Pet, a final app developed by Annete, Emilie, and Marleigh for our Mobile App Development Course
# Final Design Document
In the modern day, with the rise of mental health awareness, the topic of self-care has been given more significance and emphasis in our everyday lives. And yet, self-care remains a hard task for many people, not only because constantly prioritizing your own needs requires a great deal of discipline, but also because we don’t always have the luxury to practice the best form of self care. For example, psychologist Bronwyn Gresham describes the three most common challenges to self care: “Time factor (lack of time in our busy days), guilt factor (that we feel unproductive, selfish, or indulgent), needs factor (not actually working to nourish or support ourselves).” Not to mention the existence of mental illnesses that further complicates this issue. Our goal with Self-Care Pet is to boost each individual’s motivation to take care of themselves.

The reasoning for why this app could help motivate people for self-care lies in the research published by Minha Lee, Sander Ackermans, Nena van As, Hanwen Chang, Enzo Lucas, and Wijnand IJsselsteijn at the CHI '19: ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. These researchers “examined how people can care for another being as a way to care for themselves” by creating a self-compassionate chatbot called Vincent. Vincent had two versions, a caregiving one and a care-receiving one. According to their research, “Care-giving Vincent asked participants to partake in self-compassion exercises. Care-receiving Vincent shared its foibles, e.g., embarrassingly arriving late at an IP address, and sought out advice.” Most importantly, “while self-compassion increased for both conditions, only those with care-receiving Vincent significantly improved.” The final conclusions of this “exploratory research shows that when a person cares for a chatbot, the person's self-compassion can be enhanced.” That is the reasoning for our app: that by caring for a virtual entity, the user can in turn care for themselves.
While our app can be used by everyone, our target would be a teen and young adult demographic. Mainly focused on people from middle school to college aged, who might find it helpful getting small reminders to do simple self care actions. Some people are forgetful, and some people need that extra motivation to do so. And some people just like having more fun collecting pets and cute clothes while they brush their teeth.
When you first open Self Care Pet, you are greeted by a prompt asking you to sign in. For new users, you will input an email address you have access to and in the password field input whatever password you would like to have for your Self-Care Pet account (demonstrated in Fig.1 and Fig.2). Next you should click “sign up”, and you will get an email to verify your account in your inbox (Fig.3). When you click on the email, it will direct you to a link that will finish the verification process (Fig.4, and Fig.5). Now you can sign into your Self-Care Pet account. Similarly to signing up for an account, you will input your email address and password and now click “sign in”. The first page you will see is “Your Pet,” which is a page dedicated to the titular self-care pet (Fig.6). This page is where you can complete most of the activities to help take care of your pet. When you drink water in real life, you can use this screen to increment your pet’s own water status bar by clicking on “Add” (Fig.7). Water intake is measured in cups, and a full water intake bar will be 15 cups, meaning it will require 15 clicks from the user to fill this progress bar. Every click should reflect one more cup of water being drunk by the user. Similarly, the sleep progress bar is measured out of 7 hours of sleep, meaning it will require 7 clicks from the user to fill this progress bar. Every click should reflect one more hour of sleep from the user. Food intake is measured in three checkboxes that correspond to breakfast, lunch, and dinner. The user would click on each checkbox in accordance to each meal being eaten. Hygiene is also measured in the progress bar, and it corresponds to brushing teeth and washing your face in the morning, showering, and brushing teeth and washing your face at night. Every click with reflect one of those tasks being completed
Figure 6 shows the cat in the “sad” state. This state is shown when the user has completed anywhere from 0 to 30% of all the stats combined. In Figure 8, you see the cat in the “neutral” state. This state is shown when the user has completed anywhere from 30% to 60% of all the stats combined. Figure 9 demonstrates the “happy” state. This state is shown when the user has completed anywhere from 60% to 100% of all the stats combined. For each state, the photo of the pet and the text below it will change.
All statistics’ units are based on what an average human requires in one day (15 cups of water, 7 hours of sleep, 3 meals a day, and basic hygiene tasks). This data (and the tools used to display them like progress bars & checkboxes) will reset at the end of the day and be saved into Firebase. Three days worth of data will be saved into the statistics page, which will be further explained later in the design document (Figure 22).

At the bottom of the page there is a series of tabs, if you click on the first one next to “Your Pet” you’ll reach the Social page (Figure 10). The Social page is where the user can choose to post a customized message to their friends list. When you first sign-up you won’t have any friend messages displayed as you have yet to make friends. We’ll come back to the social page after we make some friends on the friends page. At the bottom, there is a tab labeled “Friends”. If you click on it you’ll be brought to the Friends page, there is text that says to “Add Friend” and under it is a text input (Figure 11). When you type your friend’s  email in and then hit return, you will see the name displayed in your friends list along with a confirmation message that they were added to your friends list (Figure 12 and Figure 13). 
Once you have friends added, you can return back to the Social page by clicking on the social tab at the bottom of the screen. Once friends are added you’ll be able to see their Mood Messages if they have posted them (Figure 14). You will see a card with their Mood Message in green text, along with smaller text that says the friend who posted it’s email, and at what time they posted. From here the user can type in a message, and when they press enter it will post their own Mood Message (Figure 15 and Figure 16). You can easily tell it’s your own Mood Message because your personal color will be pink, while your friends are in green. If you're not happy, or not resonating with what your current Mood Message says you can easily overwrite it (Figure 17 and Figure 18). 

When you click the tab to the right of Friends labeled Fitness, you will be brought to a page with a button that says “Start Tracking” (Figure 19). This page is a map and will track how far you move throughout the day, and that data will be incorporated into your pet’s exercise for the day. Once you click “Start Tracking” and allow Self-Care Pet to track your location you will be greeted with a map displaying your current location, and the option to have the app stop tracking you using the button right under the map (Figure 20). You can zoom in or out of the map by using two fingers (Figure 21). 
The last tab located the farthest to the right is the statistics page, and you can navigate to it by clicking the tab labeled “Status” in the navigation bar at the bottom of the page. This page displays four different graphs, one for each of the statistics being measured on the main “Your Pet” page. They will all be out of the same percentages with the labels of 0%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100% (Figure 22, and Figure 23). Each different bar represents a different day of the week. We will take the saved data from the “your pets” page described above at the end of each day and convert that data into the percentage of completion. For example, if the user drank 5 cups of water on Monday, that would be 5/15 = 33%. The bar on Monday would display 33%, which is somewhere between our 25% and 50% labels. As the data saves over the course of three, there will be three bars for each of the four graphs, representing the percentage of completion for each day. The graphs will completely reset at the end of the three days and become empty until the data for the fourth day comes in. Users will not be able to access the data from previous weeks because we do not want them to fixate on how much they did or did not complete in the past, or to fixate on comparing themselves with their past self. We want them simply to know how they are doing in the present week. 
As mentioned in our second paragraph, we wanted to create an environment where the user was taking care of someone/something else by taking care of themselves. Each decision was made with the user’s wellness at the forefront of our minds. We created a visual representation of how the user has taken care of their pet through progress bars, and most importantly the pet’s expression and text. While measuring socialization is difficult, it is still something everyone needs. To make sure our users are connecting in some manner, we instituted our Social page and Friends feature. While there are many introverted users, the Mood Message is dedicated to feelings in particular and can make it easier to express yourself. We hope you enjoy using Self-Care Pet.

All the [Figures](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1dZ-oXHbNdgyjBmyj5S9EvH9D8lE8Y-X4lFZSlTb6uok/edit?usp=sharing) mentioned in this section.



# Implementation Notes
The implementation process of Self Care Pet was incredibly rewarding, challenging, and showcased the complex nature of app development and implementation. To start, we’ll go over the key implementation decisions of Self Care Pet. We developed the app using javascript, and CSS using React. We got a large portion of our components from React Native, and React Native Paper. We choose components from React Native, and React Native Paper for both their aesthetics and functionality. One of the highlights from React Native Paper is the Card Component. It has the functionality we need to display a user's current Mood Message, but it also has plenty of room to grow. The Card has the ability to add an image and or an icon. In any future development of the app, the icon is where you would post an emoticon representing how you feel. We chose the bottom tab navigation from React Native, as it has the opportunity to expand with custom badge icons. Additionally, it reminds the user of the features the app has and is far more intuitive than the drawer navigation. We made sure to leave the Settings page up at the top corner to signify to the user that it was much different than the five options at the bottom of the page. The user’s focus will stay at the bottom of the page where all the main actions occur. The order of the bottom tabs are also deliberate. The main page that we open to is the “Your Pet” screen– and it’s the main focus of the app. We also want to incentivize the user to get some sort of social interaction so it’s directly followed up by the social page, along with the friends tab. We follow the social section with another life necessity Fitness. We moved the Status page to the end as it’s not a tab that will be used as often.

On the main pet page, we choose progress bars as it’s exciting to be able to visually see your progress as you complete tasks throughout the day. A key part of our implementation was incorporating that visual update with the progress bar in tandem with how the pet is doing. The heart of our app is the attachment and care you develop towards your pet. Seeing the pet feel better is another mood booster– and it is also associated with a textual description of how your pet is doing. We also wanted to implement a way to track the user’s fitness, and we did that through a map view that follows the user through the day.

While we did not get the opportunity to maximize the UI experience throughout the whole application, there are key moments where we worked hard to create meaningful interactions. The design of Self Care Pet’s main cat was created using Figma assets and we worked to create faces that could get across the pets feelings without completely demoralizing the user. On the social page, there were a series of modifications made to the Cards for user’s posts. The body text was relatively small, so we switched it to the Card title to emphasize the user’s current mood. We also gave them two lines to express themselves in, as 1 line was too little, and we also wanted to limit the length of the messages so users would not feel overwhelmed. In future iterations of the app, we hope to institute the character limit in the text input itself. The color of the Mood Message text was also important. To show the clear difference between your personal Mood Message and your friends we choose two separate colors. Additionally, friend messages are stored in a flat list while your own message is static at the top of the page.

We store a significant portion of our data in Firestore, and have a total of four collections: App Storage, FriendsLists, MoodMessages, and FriendRequests (which is not used in our final implementation, but will remain in our database for future uses). App Storage stores the user’s Pet Data/Self Care statistics. Documents are labeled by the user’s email. Each document stores three boolean values: checkedBreakfast, checkedLunch, and checkedDinner. They represent what meal boxes the user has ticked in the app. The other three fields are numbers representing the user’s other status bar progress, aptly labeled hygieneProgress, sleepProgress, and waterProgress. It is pulled from to display all the information on the Status page. The FriendsLists collection has documents also labeled by the user’s email. Each document contains the array friendArray. FriendArray stores strings of the emails  belonging to the user’s friends on the app. The MoodMessages collection once again is labeled by the user’s email. All the fields are stored as strings. CurrentMood is a string that is overwritten whenever you write in a new Mood Message. We don’t want to keep a backlog of messages, instead it acts as a status message to inform your friends how you’re feeling at the moment. Similarly timeStamp gets overwritten when you post so it gets an accurate time of posting. This is important because time of posting gives your friends another chance to understand where you’re coming from. A Mood Message posted at noon on a saturday feels very different than one that’s posted at 3am on a Thursday. The last field is email, and it was added for ease of retrieval during the process of displaying all of your friends emails on their Mood Messages. The last section of data stored in Firestore is our FriendRequests collection. This collection is defunct, but left as the requesting progress was an executable function but we ran into issues with users actually accepting the requests. While we would have loved to get this implementation finished, we switched gears to a simple add friend mechanic where you would simply add friends based on their email addresses. We also use Firebase to organize all our user data. It handles identifiers using the user’s email address. Using email to sign in, and to verify their account information.

Moving on to the topic of noteworthy aspects of our code. One of them is the modular nature of our SocialScreen and FriendsScreen. Separating these components simplified the development process and made the code much more readable to anyone viewing it. We also have a series of catch exceptions, so our code won’t completely break even if something malfunctions. We have also littered helpful console logs throughout the code to demonstrate what information is being passed through different components for ease of debugging. We have also implemented a bar chart using React Native Chart Kit. This is something new that we had not used before in class, so it was exciting to work with it in our final implementation.

There are a series of things that did not reach our expectations in terms of functionality, and the general way it works. Our login page caused us trouble when inputting an email and password. With each letter input, the keyboard pops down, and then pops back up. It is a bit of a nuisance and results in the user needing to wait a little longer to input their information. This is a pitfall as in the real world, it would be an instant uninstall for any user that downloaded the app. On the main pet page, whenever you click on and increment the self care stats it rerenders the page in a jarring way. The visual representation of the cat looks glitchy for a moment, and the bottom navigation also rerenders in a distracting way. It’s relatively disorienting and that is not something we would like for our self care app. There are also some issues with the status page and how the data is displayed. During our testing process the tracking across days has not worked effectively. There are a series of issues with the graphs, and the representation of the days is not consistent and is not remotely intuitive. On the social screen, you can only write so much before your message gets cut off, as we only allowed two lines for the message. There is no feedback to the user about this issue and that is not ideal.

Lastly we’ll present our prioritized wishlist of next implementations, to keep this list concise we will present the top three next implementations. Our biggest priority moving forward would be to reinstate the requestFriends function, and then work to get a functioning way of receiving the requests, and accepting the requests. We’ve put this as our top priority because as of now, anyone with an account and the email you used to sign up can see what you’ve posted. Once again, not ideal. The next implementation we would like to work on is feedback on the fitness page. As of right now the user has no way of understanding how far they’ve walked throughout the day. Additionally, there is no exercise bar on the main Your Pet page so we would link the progress from there and pass it to our Your Pet page. The last implementation we would prioritize is setting up “Food Spots.” The idea of a “Food Spot” is the user sets areas they visit where they can get food. Then they can only increment their food checks when they’ve been at a “Food Spot” for a set amount of time. Since we already have tracking services from our map, this is a great way to incorporate that data. It also gives the user another incentive to push them to be accurate in the data they submit. It would also be another great use of the mobile aspect of the app. To end, a bonus task would be to polish the UI and aesthetics of the app! Once the previous three implementations are fleshed out, and the UI polished, we feel like our app would be in a great place to place on an app platform.
